[ Music ]
In these increasingly
unsettling economic times,
people have begun to seek
refuge in precious metals
to create a sense of
financial stability.
If you've been following
the news, however,
metals have just taken a steep
dive causing panic among the
investors around the world.
With rigged markets and
cash under the mattress
as the only seeming viable
options, confusion reigns.
Catherine Austin Fitts has made
the study of money her life.
Her knowledge has taken her from
Wall Street investment banking
to the White House where she
was a Commissioner for HUD
under the first Bush
administration.
Today she's an investment
advisor and publisher
of the Solari Report, and she's
here to help us put a little bit
of reality on this pancake.
[Laughter] This is just...
I love talking to people like
you, and you're wonderful
at talking to people like me
who the world of derivatives
and investments and
securities and all of this seems
like a upside down
board game of some kind.
It just doesn't make sense.
It's not a real world.
It's not a real language.
Well, here's what's happened.
What we've seen since, and
it's really been the mid-80's,
we've seen an integration of the
financial system with warfare.
So now rather than drop
our army and go to war,
we're having economic
warfare, and it's happening
on both the overt
and the covert,
and we can see both the Treasury
and the central bank intervene
in the market for reasons that
have to do with geopolitics,
you know, both political
and economic,
that if you were sitting in
their chair makes total sense,
but if you're watching
the market,
it makes absolutely no sense.
No sense. Yeah.
And I'll never forget
when I first started
to study precious metals.
A wonderful person
who's very knowledgeable
about commodities marketing
precious metals tried
to interest me, and I
said, "Well, you know,
I have no background in
precious metals," and he said,
"I just want you to watch
the market," and I started
to watch the price of
gold for about 3 days,
and I called him back,
and I said, "You know,
I don't know anything
about precious metals,
but I have to tell you, I
know a lot about markets.
There's no way a market
can behave like this."
This is...
This is a managed situation.
This is not a market, and
we've watched that in sector
after sector, particularly
as we've centralized both
the control of capital
and we've centralized
different industries.
What you're watching is an
integration of national security
and geopolitical strategy with
financial markets and economics,
and so oftentimes you'll see the
oil price managed or the price
of gold managed for
geopolitical strategic reasons
that if you were the Secretary
of the Treasury, you know,
you would think was
the right thing to do,
but the global game is causing
a management that if you're
in the market trying to
deal with fundamentals,
it's just Orwellian,
and, of course, you know,
it's very difficult
in these environments
to get adequate information
about what's going on.
So it can be very mind numbing
for the retail investor
who's just trying
to make sensible
decisions, and up is down,
and down is up, and, you know...
That is what it's like.
It's like dropping down
the rabbit hole, [laughter]
and the funny thing, I mean...
Financial puzzle powers
is what I call it.
[Laughter] Exactly.
Didn't it used to be
something kind of like this?
I mean if there never
was any kind of market
that when you had an upside in
the stock market, you had kind
of a downside in metals, and
when the market went down,
metals went up, and it seemed
to have its own little
balancing act,
which has long since
disappeared.
Was that ever real, or
was that manipulated, too?
Well, I think to
a certain extent,
there's always been a balance
of fundamental economics
and markets with management.
But not anymore.
Now even those basic kind of
factors don't seem to align.
Here's what's interesting.
If you look at the
people managing,
fundamental economics
absolutely matter to them.
They are optimizers.
You have to be.
It's a big planet.
There are a lot of people,
and so you can't keep
a price, you know.
If there's more and more
people and less and less land
to grow wheat on, you can't keep
the price of wheat down forever.
So fundamentals matter
to everybody,
but we do see these situations
where you get enormous
intervention,
not just of governments, but
of various private cartels,
and we're watching an
integration of economic warfare,
of literally warfare with
financial markets, and,
of course, what's happened
as we've centralized
and as we've globalized, digital
technology gives us the ability
to now create things
like derivatives,
which gives us the
ability to manage
in powerful ways we
never could before.
So we see interest rates
coming down, down, down.
It's like the limbo dance.
How low can they go?
And if you look, in fact,
at the books of derivatives,
the vast majority are
interest rate swaps,
and that technology is
giving you the ability
to do these things in ways
that many participants
in the market are
not familiar with.
You know, it kind
of snuck up on them.
So it's absolutely changing, and
what it means is that you need
to have a real picture of your
world, which is of an ecosystem.
Right. So I need to be
able to look, you know,
when I grew up there were people
who read the New York Times
and were interested in
policy, and there were people
who read the Wall Street Journal
and were interested in markets,
and the two were totally
separate universes
and had nothing to do
with each other, you know.
Right. And now what we're
talking about is an integration
where whether it's
political management
or market fundamentals, you
need to integrate both of them,
and you need to be able to
see the world as an ecosystem,
a living system on
an integrated basis,
and if you've been educated
in our system, you know,
there are places in the world
where people are educated
to think that way.
You know, it's not a big
deal here if you've come
up in your little box and
you're very knowledgeable
in your little box,
it's very shocking.
Yeah, it is.
Okay, so now the news
the last few days,
it started last Friday.
Apparently I remember reading
in one article that 500...
500 tons of gold were dumped
in one day onto the market.
We're seeing very unusual
patterns in the gold market.
Gold has been in a
consolidation since late 2011.
We... To give you an
example, gold started
up in a very significant
way about 12 years ago.
So for the last 12 years,
gold has out performed the
Dow every year for 12 years
where that's a stunning
bull market,
and we saw gold hit a
high in September, 2011,
and it's been consolidating
since,
and what's interesting
is the primary move
up in gold has very
much tracked two things.
One is the increase
in treasury debt
and sovereign government
debt worldwide.
So the more we print, you know,
and gold is not so much going
up in value as the fiat
currency is going down in value.
So that's what we
call debasement.
So but we've also seen
is for the last, say,
5 years a very tight
relationship...
If you do a correlation of the
copper price with the S&P 500,
you get a very tight
correlation.
So we've seen the
Federal Reserve does a
quantitative ease.
It's called quantitative ease,
and so they spend the money
supply, and commodities
and stocks go up together.
So risk-based assets, real
things, go up together.
What suddenly started last
year is a tremendous divergence
between commodities and the
stock market and you see it.
If it's quite extraordinary,
divergence of the copper price
and stocks, and you're
watching it,
and you're thinking
how can this be?
What is going on?
Now the market people
would argue
that we're experiencing
tremendous deflation globally.
The economy's slowing down,
and that's very deflationary.
You know, the people who argue
that the system is managed say,
you know, "This can't
occur naturally."
And, in fact, you
have reasons to want
to bring commodity prices down,
and you have reasons to want
to bring the precious
metals prices
down that are very powerful
from a management standpoint,
and when we saw, we saw
a very powerful drop,
we had one of the big
Wall Street firms come
out on Wednesday and say,
"Oh, gold's going down.
We recommend to all of
our clients to short it."
And then you...
it was stable for a day,
and then Friday, nosedive.
Right. Monday, more nosedive,
and then after the nosedive
on Monday, you see the
CME come out and say, "Oh,
we're increasing margin
requirements on gold, silver."
Margin requirements is one of
the things that gets increased,
and, you know, you pull
up the margin requirements
and the market price drops.
So there's a...
you know, there's
several powerful arguments
as to why institutionally
the people
who manage the financial
system and are concerned
with financial stability
could want gold to come down.
Is there a gold cartel
so to speak?
Well, if you look at who has
traditionally managed this
market, the bullion banks in
London and the United States,
and that says, "Yes,
there's a gold cartel,"
but in my personal experience,
gold is probably the most
important asset globally
that behind the scenes
is used to balance trade.
You know, gold is the power
within the financial community,
gold is one of the
major power positions.
So I don't care what
the price is, you know,
who's got the gold is
a very important part.
Well, yes, and what seemed to
me to be happening, and, again,
I'm just an amateur spectator,
but what seemed to me is
that this was also
an interesting way
as the stakes rise
globally and it becomes...
the system seems to be coming
more apart at the seams
to start flushing out private
ownership of gold, too.
A lot of people freaked
out and started selling.
Right. Well if you want to bring
in a lot of inventory fast,
this is how you do it.
Yeah, crash the price.
You crash the price,
but let's look
at financial stability globally.
We have had for many decades
what's called a long term bull
market in bonds.
Interest rates have been
coming down, down, down,
and that has put a floor
in the price of bonds.
We've seen tremendous investment
both institutional and retail go
into bonds, and everyone's
looking at this huge bond market
because we've been printing,
printing, printing, printing,
printing, and saying, you know,
interest rates can't go
much lower, so what's going
to happen when this turns?
Right. And, of course, there are
several things that can happen.
One thing is we can literally do
a planetary debt for equity swap
and move money into the equity
markets and shift the model,
shift, you know, be on an
equity model, but, you know,
that's the nice solution.
That would be the nice result.
The not so nice is everybody
rushes for safety to get
out of the bond market
if interest...
because if interest rates
turn, let alone turn sharply,
we can see much more precipitous
drops in the value of bonds
than even, you know, in the kind
of volatility we've
seen in equity.
Suddenly equities are looking
even less volatile than bonds,
and so if you're the managers
of the financial system,
that's a stampede
you want to prevent.
Now we've seen a series
of things we need to talk
about bank resolutions.
We've seen a series of things
that is making the retail
investor, the citizen,
nervous about the stability
of the financial system,
and one of the things
that happens
when that happens is they
start to buy precious metals.
Right. Right.
And, you know, and they
start to move their money
out of risk based investments.
They start to move out of bonds.
In February, I'll never
forget it, I went to one
of the services that
provides information
on different financial
products in February, and I...
because I never invest in the
long Treasury bond market.
So I don't watch it closely.
The 6 month return
on their aggregate
of all bond funds focused on
US Treasuries in February,
guess what the last
6 month return was.
I couldn't.
Negative 7.6%.
Negative...
Negative 7...
Now if you're trying to finance
we now have the Federal Reserve
buying over 90% of the auctions.
Right. Okay, so if you're
responsible to borrow the money,
you need to finance
Social Security
to finance disability
to finance welfare.
Right. To finance all
those defense contracts,
and the treasury market
is dropping that fast.
You know, you're going
from something that's
relatively stable
to something that's experiencing
relatively swift drops.
That's a real...
So you have to create something
to shift the relative value.
Well, you have to
defend the bond market,
and the interesting thing is
to defend the bond market,
you've got to defend
the stock market.
Right. Okay?
And you've got to find a managed
process for these things to...
you know, for these
shifts to happen,
and the problem is precious
metals is a little bit
like the smoke alarm.
You know, the price
moves up too fast,
and then suddenly
everybody's looking.
Right... at what's going on.
Right. You've got a
spiral, a danger, a spiral,
or a contagion happening
that can be very dangerous.
But what about in reverse
like what happened
last Friday and Monday?
Well here's the interesting
thing
because we don't know what
happened or why it happened
and how much was markets
versus management,
but let me just postulate
some possible scenarios.
We know we've had quite a sort
of alarm bell ring globally
as a result of what
happened in Cyprus.
We'll talk about that
in some detail, yeah.
Right. So the first, you
know, for my entire lifetime,
we have most people in the
developed world saying, "Oh,
I don't have to worry that we're
running the economy in a way
that doesn't make sense because
I have a government guarantee.
I have a treasury bond.
I have an insured deposit.
I don't have to worry.
You know, my deck chair
on the Titanic is
government-guaranteed,
so I don't have to worry
about, you know, the boat,
because the boat's
big and safe, right?
Yeah, right.
So we've all been living
in this sort of bubble
where we don't have to worry
about whether things
are fundamentally sound.
That's part of the problem
with being in a debt
versus an equity model
and why I think going
in an equity model
is very healthy,
but so what happened was the
first IMF and ECB proposal
for the resolution of the
banking problems in Cyprus was
to tax the insured deposits,
and even when they backed off,
there was a huge uproar.
Even when they backed
off, you know,
capital controls were placed
on it, which said if you're
in a weaker bank or a
weaker country, you know,
your euro insurance
is not so good
as the euro insurance
in Germany.
You know, now you're
talking about a 2-tiered,
and that was a wakeup call
because that was the first time
really in the developed world
that somebody said,
you know, "Yeah,
maybe you have insurance,
maybe you don't."
Right. You know, so
immediately everybody
in the United States is
saying, "Well, what about FDIC?"
Now, what had been happening
was we went through the process
in the 2008-2009 where we
bailed out banks, and of course,
Europe has been going
through a situation
where literally what we did
is we took the debt that was
on the banks and we moved
it to the government.
You know, so government
bailed out the debt,
and the banks got protected at
the cost of the greater system,
and when we passed Dot
Frank after the bailouts,
we passed a law, Dot
Frank, and said, okay,
the regulators can't do
too big to fail anymore.
They've got to come up with
resolution methods that allow us
to take down a bank,
strip a bank apart,
resolve a troubled bank without
guaranteeing all their deposit
and allowing them to
keep behaving this way.
We need big banks to
fail, and we absolutely do
because we have created
a financial sector,
which is far bigger
than what we need,
and it's become like a tapeworm.
Right. Right.
Right. So you say we need
the large banks to fail.
We need a way to shrink this
industry back to a level
which supports fundamental
economics
as opposed to as a parasite.
So, you know, so we need
to shrink the sector.
How do we do it?
So the regulators were
required by Dot Frank to go out
and figure out how they
were going to do this
and get this ready,
and, in fact,
we've seen publications both
in Europe and North America
with regulations saying, okay,
here's how we're going to do it,
and, of course, what it means is
the uninsured deposits are going
to get written off,
the creditors are going
to get written off or
swapped for equity,
and so the world is now looking
at this and realizing, oh,
you know, accountability as we
can, you know, is on its way.
Now, if you are in
an environment
where you're a regulator and
you have to resolve a large bank
in this way, one of the dangers
is if the gold price is high
and it sends an alarm bell like
Cyprus did where everybody said,
you know, everybody who
had gold in Cyprus was
in much better shape than
everybody who had, you know,
insured bank deposits.
Right. So if you're a regulator,
you have reason to want
to get a reset in
the gold price.
Because that will help reset the
value of the dollar, etc. Well,
because let's say your gold high
has been approximately 1900.
Now you're a little
bit below 1400.
You reset it down to 1400,
then you resolve the bank even
if it kicks it back up to
1800, you know, you're still
within the zone, and my guess,
and this is just a guess,
is that it is in the interest
of the financial system
to have a managed rise
in the gold price,
but to have a managed
rise and to do it in a way
that doesn't trigger this
contagion throughout the bond
market because the bond
market is the big intimidator.
Right. But yet at the same
time while this was going on,
I was reading, you know,
various articles on it,
and one of the articles
was saying remember,
this is a paper market.
This is a paper market.
It's not the real asset physical
gold, and then at the same time,
the price of paper gold
was dropping like a stone,
the buy-to-sell ratio in the
physical market was 50 to 1.
There have been, you know,
if you look at the physical
market both institutional
and retail, there have
been very unusual patterns.
So in the retail markets here
in the United States we've
seen tremendous reports
at retail level from
the dealers.
They can't get product.
They can't...
Right. You know, 90% silver,
they can't get it at any price.
We saw the premiums on 90%
go from 2 to 3% to, you know,
12% to clear and then you
couldn't clear it at any price,
which is very unusual.
So that would indicate that
it's the paper price coming down
and the physical market
can't clear the paper price.
Now I've had reports from
both the institutional...
you see reports from the
institutional markets
that there's serious problems
in the physical market
or seizes up .
Others say we're not
having problems at all.
So it's...
What kind of problems?
So, for example, we see the
Bundesbank saying they want
their gold back from Paris and
from New York, and, you know,
and Paris and New York
saying, "Oh well, 7 years."
Give us seven years.
[Laughter] Yeah, like give
us a little time to tap dance
and find that gold for you.
It's clear, you know,
many people hold their
precious metals in a bank
in what's called an
unallocated pool.
So it's not gold
sitting in their vault.
It's sitting in their
safe deposit box.
It's in a pool managed by
the bank, and, you know,
it's pretty likely
that many of those
on allocated pools don't
really have the gold.
Right. Right.
So you see institutions now
saying, "If you want your gold,
you have to sell it, and we
give you cash," you know,
or you see different
trading exchanges saying...
That you can't get your physical
gold back because it's gone.
So, one of the, you know,
one theory is that at times
like this you see what
I call snap, crackle,
pop throughout the
institutional inventories.
You know, people are racing
to cover their shufflings,
and I think it wouldn't surprise
me if Cyprus rang a bell
and a lot of people suddenly
wanted to take delivery
of their gold, or, you know...
So you're seeing a little
bit of snap, crackle, pop,
but there was one other thing I
wanted to mention, which is one
of the biggest inventories
worldwide
in gold has been the
inventories behind the exchange
traded funds.
So if you look at the...
I have an article
called "Disclosure
and the Precious Metals
Puzzle Palace," which is
about the large gold
and silver ETF's,
and the gold one's GLD
is the ticker symbol.
There have been reports of
very unusual, as the price
of gold has come down, huge
inventory leaving the GLD,
you know, and you kind of wonder
well, they were stockpiling it
on the way up and now they are
shifting it on the way down.
What is going on behind there?
And so if you look
at those moves,
I suspect something
is very much up.
So there's clearly the behavior
of the physical market appears
to be very different than the
behavior of the paper market,
and it's one of the reasons
the interesting thing
in this environment has been
when you see a price drop
that is that precipitous, what
I would expect is, you know,
you would expect
a sense of panic.
What's been most unusual, and
I think Cyprus had a lot to do
with this, you see a lot
of retail gold investors.
I'm not saying professionals,
you know,
and so these are people whose
positions are not margin
or they're holding them at home.
You know, their first
reaction is should I buy more?
[Laughter] Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah.
That's true.
It's not necessarily
having the intended effect.
Right. And the other is sort
of this is hard to stomach,
but if I sold my gold,
where would I go?
Exactly. And because the...
I think there is a remark...
you know, I find that
most people are smart
about the basics.
What they know is cash is
not what it was in 2008.
In 2008 when we saw
gold and stocks crash,
you know, we could go to cash.
We could go to fixed income.
We could go to bonds.
Cash and bonds are not looking
so attractive right now,
and so I think, you
know, I think people...
we're getting much more used to
living in a world of volatility
and saying, "Look, I want
something that's real."
That's real, yeah.
So a company that has...
that makes a very useful product
or service and can provide me
with a dividend is real.
A gold coin that I can
hold in my hand is real.
Land and real estate is real.
So you're starting to see, you
know, what's been happening
for many, many decades
is, and you've got
to give them credit,
they're very clever.
You know, I call it Mr. Global,
but Mr. Global has been
saying is, you know, "Regina,
just give me your money,
and I'll give you a nice,
steady yield, and you don't have
to worry about the ups and downs
and vagaries of this world.
You finance me controlling
the land
and controlling the companies
and controlling the gold,
and you just stay in your
bubble," and you're like, "Cool,
you know, that's a nice world."
Nice and easy.
Yeah, that's easy
and sort of Madoff.
You know that's the Madoff,
and now what's happening
is we're saying,
"Well wait a minute.
Maybe I'd rather own the land,
own the gold, own the companies
and have, you know, financed
Mr. Global controlling
and owning me.
Yes. You know, because
this guy's getting too big.
That seems like a
big shift in mindset.
Right. So I'd rather, you know,
finance these things directly
and not go through his fund
or his exchange rate
[inaudible] or whatever.
I want to be...
you know, but then suddenly
you're like, "Oh my God,
this is really a
volatile world."
Right. You know, this is
really a dangerous world,
and he's trying to pump and
dump me out of my assets.
So, you know, it's a, you
know, you're getting played
at the micro level by
his ability to whip
up the stock and sell you on it.
Absolutely.
And so it's a funny
kind of situation
where you have to
know the value.
You have to know why you're
investing in something,
and you need to be able to...
...ride it.
It was funny, when I personally
first started to buy gold
and silver, it was many
years ago, and, you know,
and I'll never forget
buying some at 457
and literally the next
day it dropped to 400,
which doesn't seem like a big
drop now, but it was then,
and my cousin has a cow pasture
behind me, and I'm literally,
I just went out and talked to
the cows, and the cows looked
at me and said, "You know,
you just need to chill."
[Laughter] And, you know,
but it took me several
of those huge dumps because
this is a pretty big one,
but we've been through
huge drops before.
Well, and let me
ask you something.
In there you were talking about
the value, and this dump before,
is the paper value tied to
the actual physical value
or is it starting to
diverge a bit now?
If you actually went
to a coin dealer...
It goes through times
when it diverges.
So it absolutely does
diverge, and, you know,
there are absolutely times
in the precious metals market
when I think the price is higher
than what I think the
fundamental value is.
Right. So, you know, you have
to be very careful, you know,
when you get in and when you
get out because you can be
in a long term primary trend and
still get hammered if you get
in wrong and get out wrong.
Yes. One country who certainly
seems to have felt comfortable
with the investment in gold
for quite a while now is China.
My understanding is they
have been purchasing massive
and massive amounts of physical
gold for quite some time.
That's all the indication.
Now and the people who argue
this is a market change.
One of the big drops we had
the report come out Thursday,
Friday that the economy
was slowing in China,
and so the people who argue this
was, you know, global deflation
from a slowing economy is
saying China's not going
to be buying what they
were because both China
and India are big, big buyers...
big, big buyers.
So they've taken the
conservative position
because of the craziness
of the market.
Here's what I think.
I think, you know, what I
see in people who participate
in the commodities or financial
markets, when something
like Friday and Monday happen...
And we're talking about April
12 and April 15, which coincided
and was the same day of the
horrible event in Boston.
And tax filing day.
Which is extremely...
Very... yes.
Extremely painful for, you
know, if you're an American
and you have to file taxes
and you're paying taxes
to a government that is not
acting in your best interest
and is trying to
take away your guns
and all this other
stuff, you're very...
it's a very tense day
for many Americans.
Anyway, so you have all these
things going on at once,
and the problem is not I think
most people I know are very
sensible, and they look at these
things and they say, "You know,
my entire economy, my
entire financial system,
is not under adult supervision."
Right. And that scares them.
That scares them because what
they're saying is I'm operating
in a governance system
and a management system
which has lost it mind.
Now, some of that happens
because the system has not
lost its mind, but it's acting
for geopolitical interests.
It can't tell you why it's doing
what it's doing, and if you were
in their seat, you would
do the same thing, but,
you know, it's very difficult.
That's not comforting
to the consumer.
Right, it's not comforting.
And not only that, you
can make no sense to it.
There's no logic to it
anymore from our perspective.
Well, I think over time
you can make sense of it.
Well, you can.
[Laughter] [Inaudible] You know,
one of the reasons I decided
to do the Solari Report was
to help people understand.
Yes. So I'll give
you an example.
One of my favorite books
for helping people understand
these issues is a book called
"The Oil Card," by Jim Norman.
I don't know if you're
familiar with it.
I can't recommend
it highly enough.
Jim Norman for many, many years
covered the energy markets
for Business Week, and then he
went to Forbes, made the mistake
of writing a story that
involved promised software.
Oops. Had to leave it
and ended up in Platts,
which is the leading trade
journal in the oil markets,
one of the leading
ones, and is, you know,
30 years of deep knowledge
on oil and gas and energy,
and when he retired, he wrote
a book called "The Oil Card,"
which talks about the
management of the oil price
for geopolitical strategic
reasons, and, you know,
you'll often see, you know,
during the 80's you
saw the oil price...
you'll see the oil price
be way above market
or way below market,
and for long periods
of time you can't fathom.
It's very Orwellian, and
you read Jim's theories
on why this happened
and the politics of it,
it makes absolute
sense, and you know,
and so I've had Jim
Norman, I think,
he's been on the Solari
Report as much as anybody
because he can sit down
and explain, "Look,
if I can hold the gap...
if I can develop the oil and
gas resources domestically
in North America and hold the
gas price at 3 or 4 dollars
when Europe is paying 8
and China is paying 15
and when the energy price
is 40% of manufacturing
in the United States,
I can do, you know,
I can take the new fabrication
technology, the new 3D printing,
all this kind of stuff and with
that subsidization of energy,
I can put US manufacturing
back in the game," you know,
and it makes total sense, but
in the meantime if you're trying
to invest in oil and gas...
It makes no sense to
the outside world.
Right, but yet you as
an American citizen may
in fact be much better off if
they do this because, you know,
it's they're looking
economy-wide.
They're not...
Well, and we're all looking to
point our fingers at somebody
because things are
going very badly.
[Laughter] I mean, you know, the
reality is they're all bad guys,
you know, and especially in
the conspiracy community,
every single rock
that's overturned,
it's always the other
person's fault.
You know, it's funny
because I got very, you know,
there's such a negativity
now on the Internet,
and I laugh at the
comments because I lived
through the bailouts, and I
was adamant that we shouldn't,
you know, that the bailouts
were a terrible idea.
I mean and we can go...
it's a much longer conversation,
much more complex
issue, but I was a...
I have a great Congresswoman...
fabulous. I was in the phone to
her office every 5 minutes...
"Do not...", and she
voted against the bill.
That's why she's fabulous,
and, you know, " Do not..."
and finally they just stopped
taking our name and address
and were overwhelmed with
calls, "Do not do the bailouts."
So the message was very clear.
We do not want to be a
prisoner of "Too Big to Fail."
So there was a very
clear message to Congress
and to the regulators, "You've
got to come up with a way
to resolve and shrink the
banking sector without 'Too Big
To Fail.'" So regulators
went out and they came
up with plans to do it.
In December the Bank of England
and the Federal Reserve
published a paper saying, "Okay,
here's how we're
going to do it."
You know, it's kind of an
overview and a framework
for how they were
going to do it.
They're required by...
well, of course, all
these websites went nuts.
"Look at these guys.
They're ready to steal
our money," you know,
and it's like you
can't win for losing.
So, you know...
Well, that's true, and
conspiracies are bound right now
because we're only two days
past the Boston Marathon event,
and so as an overview
even though this falls
in that category, is
there a correlation
between terrorist events and
these markets and these doings
and also false flag events?
Yeah, no, I assume...
I, you know, it's really funny
because you saw the price
of gold melting down on Monday.
So the Dow down, Dow, S&P's,
so the equity markets
really dropping,
and suddenly something
happens that just happens
to cut off telephone service and
other reports of cable service
to one of the largest areas of
equity management in the world.
[Laughter] Yeah, you know,
so I immediately
assumed, oh, they're...
somebody's worried about...
False flag event.
Or, you know, I would
say market intervention.
[Laughter] A market
intervention.
Oh, and it's for
something so horrific.
I mean, then, of course, you
know, it breaks your heart
because you have to look
at the psychopathic
behavior in this case.
I mean, you're looking at it
from a pragmatic point of view.
So you can see why they
might do what they do,
but we're talking
about psychopaths.
Well, but the other thing is
it's not clear because in a lot
of these situations
you have competition
between different factions.
So what you're watching is what
I call the Midianite thing.
There's a great...
my favorite story in the
Bible is the story of Gideon,
and Gideon comes down
the side of the mountain
with Gideon's army
that has no weapons.
It's just lanterns and
they're making noise
with slight vibration, and the
Midianites are so distrustful
of each other they jump up in
the valley and kill each other,
and sometimes you get
the Midianite thing
where you have other, you know,
different factions
doing these things.
So it's a very murky picture.
Very murky indeed.
So I just wanted to bring that
up because of what was happening
in the financial markets on...
at the exact same time.
Well, you know, a lot, I tend
to, you know, you asked me
if I had read anything about
Boston, and I said, "No,"
because what I study is
the financial patterns.
You know, I try and map out the
financial ecosystem around any
of these events, and
what you see if you map
out the financial ecosystem, it
tells a very different story,
and it tells a very
different story
than any either the
ulterior media
or the corporate media tell.
So I tend not to
listen to much of that,
and I look at the financials.
So I'll give you an example.
About a week before the
Indonesian tsunami I had a
friend who bought a world
bond fund that had 15%
of the principle in
Indonesian sovereign debt.
It was about two weeks before,
and the week before the
tsunami, it dropped overnight.
It was a closed in fund.
It dropped overnight 15% with
nothing going on in the market,
no change in interest rates,
no change in, you know,
just inexplicable, and it was
a very high quality sponsor,
a very good company, and I've
never seen anything like it.
It made no sense.
It was one of these
baffling Orwellian,
and we called the sponsor,
and we tried to figure it out.
We did research, and if
you looked at the selling,
there was massive sales.
I mean, massive.
A week before the tsunami.
Yeah and then the tsunami
happened, and it's amazing
because I'm a very
positive person.
I almost never get depressed,
and for a week after that I was
in a real depression because
I thought number 1, you know,
I live in a world where
someone could know a tsunami was
happening a week from
now and not warn people.
That's number one,
but number two,
I've got to help
people understand how
to protect their assets, and
how do you do that in a world
where people have that kind
of inside information
and you don't?
You know, I used to work at a
wonderful firm in Wall Street,
you know, and the chairman
would come in once a year
at our strategic
planning and say,
"Let me tell you what's going
to happen over the next year,"
you know, and you had some sense
of what was going to go down.
Now we're living in a
world where you can get hit
with wild cards from
any different direction,
and it was funny.
I started what I call a Solari
Circle, which is, you know,
it's a circle of people who...
it's either a financial action
club if you don't want to invest
or an investment club.
You can read all about it on my
website, but I called, you know,
10 of my favorite sort of
people, investors, and I said,
"You know, we have
to do a circle,"
and we did it through...
you can do it through person
or you can meet through phone,
and I said, "because I
can't be alone in this.
This is too lonely.
I can't be smart
enough by myself.
I can't be smart enough
with subscription services.
I need a group of
real human beings
to help me navigate
this environment.
So we need to do a circle."
[Laughter] Yeah, I
mean, and actually
to have a really successful
circle I would think you would
need a very diverse
cast of characters.
Very diverse.
Because as you speak about the
tsunami there was some esoteric
discussion way back then, too,
that you could certainly predict
it if you have the technology
to predict it to
create a tsunami.
Right. So there you go.
You're talking about it
goes so deep, so diverse,
and so do you have
a diverse circle?
What was interesting is we had
the circle operated for 7 years,
and we just closed it down.
That circle we had each
person, we had 10 people,
each in a different state
all over the country,
and one of the things we
would do is we would go
and we would do a report
on the economy as we saw it
on our day-to-day lives,
and you got a very robust,
unbelievably smart picture of
what was happening domestically
in the US economy that you
never got on the media,
and it was quite
remarkable, and you had people
with very different backgrounds
and points of view, and in terms
of mapping the world and
understanding what was going on,
it was not only unbelievably
useful,
but it was very energizing
in the sense
that you didn't feel
alone and you didn't feel
like you were a prisoner of
the Orwellian puzzle palace.
Yes, exactly.
You know, it was a way of
breaking through the matrix.
Yes. And it worked, but
it required, you know,
when I end the Solari Report,
every time I say it I say,
"Don't worry about whether
there is a conspiracy.
If you're not in one,
you need to start one."
[Laughter] No truly.
That's true.
I mean, it is true.
This conspiracy word has always
been a strange word for me
because I grew up in a world
where everyone was organized
and operated around
conspiracies.
Now that didn't mean they
were illegal but, you know,
some were legal, some were
illegal, but, you know,
you got together, you made a
plan, and then you snuck around
and you implemented it.
Right. And when I was in
Wall Street there was this
wonderful guy.
He was a chief of staff to one
of the big media companies,
and he had been in government,
and we were both very interested
in sort of civic life,
and he would call me up,
and he would say, "Look, these
guys are getting together
and doing this thing
that's terrible,
and it's bad for the city."
We loved the city.
"It's bad for the city.
So I suggest we conspire
and stop them."
It was like a game.
That's a conspiracy.
It was like a sport, yeah, and
that's a conspiracy, you know,
and to me that was
the operating...
that's how you got things done.
So to me conspiracies was
just the way the world worked,
and then when I ended up
in the situation of sort
of going public and everybody
started talking conspiracies
like they were a bad thing or
an unusual thing, and I said,
"You know, you have been
brainwashed to believe...
you know, you've
been brainwashed
to become a person who's
incapable of organizing
and effecting conspiracies, and
what you need to do is you need
to not yell at them about yours.
What we need to do
is all conspire
to create a wealth building
decentralized economy."
[Laughter] Here, here.
Yes. You know, and the way to
do it is to make money doing it.
I mean, I come from a
world where, you know,
when the top guys decided
they wanted to go to Rome,
they didn't say,
"Let's go to Rome."
They said, "How do we
engineer the system
so everybody can make
money going to Rome?"
You know, and then
you engineer it
and then suddenly everybody
starts going to Rome
because that makes the money.
Okay, so how do we engineer
helping each other all making
money, building wealth
building, decentralized economy
that can invite these guys
out of the psychopathic model
and into, you know, something
a little bit more, you know,
amusing for [inaudible].
[Laughter] And profitable, and
that's what you're working on.
I want to talk about...
when we get just a little
further in the conversation,
one more thing I want to
talk about, I would like you
to explain how you do that and
how you're advising people now,
but I have one more thing
I want to talk about.
It's a personal bone to pick,
but millions and millions
of people are going through it.
We just went through the process
of obtaining a conventional
loan,
but there was nothing
conventional
about the process
[laughter] of getting a loan.
It was horrifying.
At first Bank of
America, who we've banked
with for a long time, and
another bank that's a cool,
small bank, but nonetheless
turned to Bank of America
and thought, "Well, you
know, you're our ally here."
They said, "Oh, interesting.
Well, we can give you 40%
against personal assets,"
and I said, "No, no, no, no.
This is a home mortgage.
No we don't really need...
we're not going to use the home
as a collateral," and I thought,
"You've got to be kidding."
Well I fled from that situation.
I found a very creative,
powerful mortgage broker
who put us with someone else,
but what we had to go through.
Right. The disclosure
is horribly invasive.
I mean, just horribly invasive.
The procedures now
are frightening.
You know one of the things that
frightens me about these kinds
of documentation is, you
know, you're signing things,
and if there's any technical
misrepresentation and cliffs,
you know, it's jail time.
It's dangerous.
So you have to be
very impeccable.
You have to give up frightening
disclosure because if you look
at where that data is going
into, it's not, you know,
it's not any place so wonderful.
They wanted to know every
deposit, who it came from,
why they wrote the check to us.
I mean, the disclosure
part was horrifying,
and I assume that's data
mining and whatever else.
Right, and the other
thing is that if you look
at the financial requirements
such as loan to value,
it's clear that an
effort is being made
to shut off credit
to Main Street.
That is what I finally
determined, and I talked
to some people in the
banking industry about it.
Another thing, which
I'll get to in a moment,
but another thing
is the house had
to meet certain HUD
standards, for example,
and that's not a HUD loan.
This isn't a government loan.
It's a private loan.
What's going on?
Although in every realistic
closing you have HUD documents
that go into the HUD database.
So HUD is present in every
real estate transaction whether
private or government
insurance or finance related.
Okay, and what about the notion
that the house had already
appraised at a certain value,
which we were buying it
at, and they said, "Oh, no,
we've just done another
inspection
on it, and, yes, it's true.
It does appraise at that, but
you need to fix this, this,
and this," and this was
huge-the knocking out a wall,
fixing the external
stucco, fixing the roof,
all these different things,
and we had 3 days to complete
that before the closing escrow.
Now that is one I
haven't heard a lot about.
That's a little...
We didn't own the home.
We had to get permission
from the owner
of the home to even do it.
So they did that.
So as I was looking
at it every which way,
I saw that a, the bank...
this was a short sell.
The bank that was selling
the house had no motivation
to sell it.
The bank that was loaning
us the money had it seemed
to be equally little
motivation to loan us the money,
and so I had a conversation
with the...
Right because remember
how the system works.
If I want to shut off credit
to Main Street, I can just put
out an order-shut off credit.
Exactly. But that's
a political problem.
So what I can also do is I can
create 27 different steps you
have to go through to make
it complex and nightmarish
and expensive for you to borrow,
and then I don't
shut off credit.
It's just as a practical
matter, I get the same results.
Because the first 3 people
trying to buy the house fell
out of escrow because they
basically flipped the bird
to the financial
institutions and said,
"We're not putting
up with this."
They were not as
motivated as I was.
Right. So we've seen if you look
at the bank regulation that's
happening locally particularly
to the local and regional
banks, and if you look
at the what's happening
with the kind
of mortgage markets
you're talking about,
what we're seeing is
the government needs
to borrow money.
It doesn't need competition
from the private sector.
That runs the danger of
running up the interest rates.
So to the extent that
you can shut off credit
and you can shut off liquidity
to Main Street, you're going
to keep a lid on interest rates,
and you're going to keep a lid
on inflation, and what
that means is the economy's
going to slow down, and...
Oh, yeah, they're talking about,
"Oh, no, the market's back."
No it can't be under these
conditions and I did speak
to the manager of
what is considered one
of the top 10 safest banks
in America, family owned,
never did a scummy
deal, they were audited.
He tried to get a loan.
They put him through that,
but he was then audited.
The bank was audited, and the
young pups that came around
and audited them said, "Why
are you making these loans,
these home loans to people?"
And they suggested on the way
out even though they
showed no losses,
you shouldn't be making
these loans, you know.
That was their recommendation.
Because then if you don't make
those loans, that money goes
in the investment portfolio,
and you buy Fannie and Freddie's
and government securities.
Exactly. So the investment
portfolio's going up, up,
up and it's the competition
for low cost of capital
because what you're trying
to do is you're trying
to borrow all the
retail deposits
at the lowest dollar possible.
So if I'm the government and I
need to borrow that money to,
you know, to keep the
game going and I want
to pay low interest rates,
the more I can make my
securities the only game
in town, the easier it is
to scarf up the deposits
from Main Street
and not, you know,
and have that money circulate
inside my hydraulic pumping
system, and not back
out onto Main Street.
So when the news headlines say,
"Oh, it appears the market...
the housing market is
recovering," that can't be.
Can it be under these
conditions?
The housing market is recovering
in nominal dollars
in some places.
We have a tremendous
divergence in the economy.
So I live in a very poor county
that's really struggling.
If you go to the areas where
you have industry that's strong,
so you go to North Dakota where
you have a big oil and gas,
you know, development of
the oil and gas deposits.
If you go to Texas, same thing.
If you go out to Silicon Valley
where the tech, you know,
and the entrepreneurship
is high, so any place
where the economy is strong,
you're seeing tremendous amounts
of money come in from
institutional investments.
So we have big hedge funds
announcing that they own...
you know, that they've
bought 16,000 units all
over the country...
I see. Yeah.
And they're going to
securitize them up,
and the sad thing is they're
going to securitize them up
and sell the securities
back to the very people
that got thrown out
of these houses.
It's going to be
very sad, but...
Very sad. So you have
both from offshore
and the institutional money a
lot of cash buyers moving in.
So you do...
But this doesn't really
effect the average US citizen,
you know.
You're a teacher or
whatnot for a living
who is just trying
to buy a house.
Think of it this way.
We have a world that's dying
and a world that's being born.
Yes. And part of what the
financial coup de etat was
about was sucking capital
out of the world that's dying
and moving it into the
world that's being born.
The problem is you changed
ownership of who owned it,
you know, but, you know,
what each one of us has
to do is find a way to migrate
ourselves and our assets
out of other world that's dying
and into the world
that's being born,
and some people have
been nimble about it,
and some people haven't, and,
you know, and there are parts
of that which are very much
engineered politically,
but there are other parts
of it that have just
to do with technology.
Right. So we're seeing,
for example,
enormous developments
in robotics.
We just had a firm out in
Silicon Valley come out and say,
"Look, our new robot can
replace anybody who's grilling
or packaging a hamburger.
Well, and the, and we can
save the fast food industry 16
billion dollars."
Well, that's 16 billion
dollars of minimum wage jobs.
What those people going to...
Right. And there is that.
So let's talk about
your new world.
Okay, so if we have to give
birth to a new world, a sound,
economic, holistic
world, what...
how are you structuring
things on behalf of your...
the people that you're advising?
And, in general, what kind
of advice are you giving
to people at large?
Well, it's a little bit...
a vision of what
that world would look
like is a little bit different
than what one individual can do
because what one
individual can do depends
on what lots of people do.
So... So let's talk about
your new ideal world
that we can move into.
Okay, so my ideal world
is one where we have...
we don't have a one-way mirror.
We have real transparency, okay.
So there's a balance of power
in terms of knowledge and data
between any individual and the
people governing and managing,
but in a way which is
geopolitically even, okay,
because part of this is we're
rebalancing the global economy.
So I think there's a...
we get out of the world
of one-way mirror,
and we get into a
world of sunshine.
How do you do that?
When the...
Oh, that's a...
How do you do that?
Well I think you do that
one house, one person,
one household, and one
neighborhood at a time.
So, for example,
one of the things
if the first thing I will
talk with an individual
about is they want to know what
can I do, and this is very much
like a health program.
You know, the first
thing you want
to do is you want to detox...
Right. [Laughter]
You know, I like...
sometimes I liken the global
financial system to a tapeworm,
and the way a tapeworm works
in your body is it ejects
into you a chemical that
makes you crave what's good
for the tapeworm
and bad for you.
So we take in the chemical,
and the next thing you know
we're feeding the tapeworm,
and if you look at many
family's income statement
and balance sheet, you know,
they're hooked, but it's not...
you know, nobody's putting
a gun to their head.
They're buying into the game.
So they're listening
to the corporate media,
and the next thing you
know they're going out
and eating food that makes
them sick, and they're dying,
and then they're, you know,
they're on the health
treadmill and, you know,
all their money's going for a
variety of health [inaudible].
So they're getting harvested,
but they have the
power to say no.
You know, I'm going to get
the tapeworm out of my mind.
I'm going to get...
I'm going...
So step number one
is we need to detox.
Then the second thing
we need to do is we need
to build our immunity
from being harvested.
So, for example,
in financial terms
as we've seen this
tremendous printing
of our very expansionary money
supply and fiscal policy,
we've seen the value
of the currencies drop,
and that's this, you know,
what's driven the
price of gold up.
I call that debasement,
and debasement is
more than just money.
I go to the store, the can
of tuna fish now
costs twice as much.
The size of the can is 20% less.
Exactly. Yeah.
And there's a 10% greater
chance I'm going to get sick
from eating it because the
quality has diminished in ways,
which are very invisible to me.
So debasement is a
much deeper issue,
but I'm living with debasement.
So part of this is
building my immune system,
understanding what's
going on, and learn how
to navigate protecting myself.
So it's very simple-detox,
build immunity, and then proceed
as you do to navigate from
the world that's dying
to the world that's being
born, and part of doing that,
and this really gets down to a
very spiritual deep question,
is we all have to get out of
the business of making money
by doing things that harm other
people and get into the business
of making money by doing
something that's useful.
So, for example, if you
look at what you do,
what you're doing is you're
helping people understand how
things work.
Okay? That is so powerful
because you can't
protect your health
of your money unless
you can navigate...
unless you have a map, okay?
So you found a way
to use your time.
Your career is trying
to help people get
from here to there, okay?
So you're not in the business
of engineering genocide.
You're in the business of
helping people get out of it.
Okay, so we all have to do
that, and I'm sure you know,
getting from one to the
other is a big process.
Well, there are sacrifices
along the way.
Right. Right.
The more of us who do
it, the easier it is.
Yes. And the, you know, the most
terrifying thing to look at is
so many of us are working
in industries and in jobs
where we're making
things worse not better.
If we really look down,
you know, it's funny.
When I first tried to
really dig in and try
to understand the mortgage
fraud, the hardest thing for me
to do was to realize that I had
been the Assistant Secretary
of Housing, and that
had been going
on within my operation,
and I hadn't seen it.
I had not seen it, and,
you know, I had to look
in the mirror and do what
many of us did, you know,
and say, "Oh, I'm the patsy.
I'm the patsy."
That's a very painful process.
We all have to go
through that process.
I call it coming clean.
So if I can come clean in
my own life and reposition
in the ways we just described,
the more of us who do that,
then the more of a market there
is for the rest of us, you know,
to move into this new world.
So it's a little
bit uncomfortable.
If everybody's doing the
waltz, it's difficult
to start doing the tango.
Right. But the more of us
who do, the more energy
and momentum there is,
and that's what we're
all trying to figure out.
How do we do it together?
Well, and, you know, when
I see people who are,
I just don't know what to do,
my career's gone, you know,
I've lost my job, or
whatnot, a lot of people have,
and the one thing that keeps
coming to me is that thing
that matters to you that you
really love, even though...
Your deepest desire.
You may not have anything
apparent supporting it.
Do what you have to do
but start that thing now.
Here's what happened to me.
My process was very typical.
I'm sitting in Washington
in 1997.
I professionally and personally
I have an overhead, you know,
revenues of about a million
dollars a month and expenses
of less that, but
certainly high, you know,
and suddenly everything
stops-all credit,
all cash flows.
And I had to within a
reasonable period of time get
down to $2,000 a month but
still supply all the compliance
and legal and everything else,
and it was one way I learned how
to live for free in America.
That's a very, you know, that's
a whole other conversation, but,
you know, my lifestyle
and my overhead had
to drop dramatically, and
I turned to my attorney...
One of the things I realized
was the corruption was so bad,
I turned to my attorney
and I said, "You know,
all my life I had supported
my self by doing, you know,
billion dollar deals."
I was somebody who was used
to operating 100 million,
200 million, a billion, and
everything was big institutions,
big governments, big
corporations, and I turned
to my attorney and I said,
"You know, we're going to have
to find a way to support
ourselves at retail
because if we want to do what's
in the interest of the citizen,
we're going to have
to find a way to work
for the citizens literally."
So we... and in my world it
was considered impossible
that you could work at retail,
and my attorney turned to me.
She's a very serious person, and
she said, "Good luck, honey."
And I said, "Well,
wait a minute.
Somewhere in America there is
someone making money telling
people the truth.
There has to be a way to
turn this into a business."
And I looked and
looked and looked,
and one of the things
I discovered was some
of the grassroots preachers.
You would go to their
conferences,
and they're telling people
here's how you be a good
husband, here's how
you be a good...
here's how you grow up, here's
how you work hard, discipline,
blah, blah, blah, and I
watched them and so I started
to do radio shows and
suddenly people came
to me asking me what
do I do about this?
What do I do about that?
And one thing led to another,
and for several years
I said I'm going
to answer every question
I get, and if you look
at the businesses that I
now run, they simply evolved
out of that, of responding
to people who needed help,
and then it was a matter of
turning those into skills
and turning those into
a business, and everyone
of us is going to have
to go through that,
and everyone of us can.
We can, and everyone is going
to have to assess their life
and look at what their true
assets are in a brand new way,
which can also be good
relationships with friends
and family because you
might need each other.
Well, here's the hard part.
There are two power centers.
One rules by force, and one
rules by love and intelligence,
light-whatever you
want to call it.
You know, we've all been
in the middle of the road,
and now we're going to
be forced to choose.
You've got to be on one side or
the other or you're road kill,
and that's a separation that's
going on, and it's very painful,
and, of course, in the short
run it's always easy to want
to avoid it, but we can't.
So that's the coming clean
process, being forced to choose.
Well, you are one wise woman,
[laughter] and you're hard
to get to, too, so
I am so grateful
that you joined us here.
It's been my pleasure
getting to know you a bit
and also having these
two conversations.
Well you are doing
wonderful things.
So thank you for
everything you're doing.
Thank you.
I hope this conversation
has helped put some reality
into the financial pages for you
in this upside down
world of money.
You can go to solari.com and
find out the inside truths
and also get guidance
from Catherine
and many other experts
she features.
Again, that's solari.com.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[ Music ]